# Exploring Language Endangerment

## Objective:
To explore and visualize the number of languages worldwide, and indicate those that are safe, vs those that are endangered/near extinction/fully extinct. Also, to map and understand the different states of linguistic macroareas and families, to discover patterns of language collapse. I intend to create a material that casual users can explore in their own time, to help spread awareness of the collapse of language diversity. 

### Data and EDA:
The majority of my data came from [Glottolog](https://glottolog.org/) and from [this study](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-021-01604-y#Tab1). All of my data processing, exploration code and MODIFIED datasets are available for view in this repository. The Glottolog and study datasets are available straight from the source at the links above. From Glottolog, I had about 26,000 language records that I had to parse through, and found that there were over 8,000 unique languages, about 300 unique language families, and over 13,000 dialects. For this project, I am working only with the family and language level data. Dialects will be a feature added down the line. With each record I had access to latitude/longitude, AES (Agglomerated Endangerment Scale), and family lineage data (if available). I found that most of my missing data was irrelevant to my analysis, but that I was missing a small amount latitude/longitude data, and AES data. This is reflected in my final dashboard as 'no status' or 'null'. Small and minimally documented languages are primarily the ones missing this information, so I included these in my analysis as well, and just labeled them as 'no status'. I used Python and the pandas library to clean and filter my data and separate out the languages for one data set. I then pulled each unique Family ID and corresponding latitude/longitude information, to be able to join the family ID dataframe as a referential table to my languages dataframe. This allowed me to do the geographic and family level analysis of my dataset. My second step was the inclusion of a supplementary dataset from the study linked above, to gather more demographic information on the countries/locations of the languages I was studying. This dataset only had information on about 6,000 languages. Because the study was focused on disappearing languages, they excluded some more widely spoken, international/national languages with high amounts of speakers in their analysis. From here, I gathered speaker population data, as well as data for GDP (per capita), Educational Spending, and EGIDS (Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale). The EGIDS status is what I used in my 'future' visualizations, to determine what languages will be left if all at risk languages disappear. I had to transform the ISO 639 code to match the glottocode so that I cound join this dataset to my original languages.csv. This data was cleaned/sorted using Microsoft Excel. I did originally intend to webscrape population data from the UNESCO WAL site, but I was unsuccessful. Remnants of that code are still available in this repository, but it was not part of the final product.

### Story/Dashboards
I created all of my visualizations in Tableau. The most updated version of my project is available on Tableau Public [here](tableau.public). My goal for this portion of the project was to create a material that can be explored by even casual users with a limited knowledge of the subject. I created two geovizzes - one to show the location and endangerment status of each of the 8,000 languages. The other was to show how languages spread from a root language/family, and the breakdown of how many languages per family are at risk. In my boxplot analysis I created a 'Percent at Risk' Calculation for each language family, by dividing the number of endangered languages in the family by the total number of languages in the family. This is what I used to show the distribution of language health by world macroarea. Finally, I created a dashboard with all currently at risk languages filtered out, to show what the future of languages looks like if all at risk languages become dormant/extinct. 

### Conclusion/Recommendations
I found that there is an extremely high trend in extinct/endangered languages in the Americas and Australia, which makes sense due to the colonization of these macroareas throughout history. Colonization lead to huge collapse of language diversity in these areas. However, there is also a beautifully vibrant strip of language diversity through the middle of Africa, especially concentrated in the Congo River basin. Over 1,300 languages here are thriving, and languages found in Africa are largely safe and not at risk in the near future.


This is intended to be used as a learning material for exploration by those who are curious about the topic, in an effort to bring awareness to language extinction and the resulting collapse of linguistic diversity. As such, I have no business recommendations to make, but I have two recommendations to anyone who sees this project:
1. Learn about at risk languages near you, or the extinct languages that used to be vibrant in your language. Explore how you can help support preservation and conservation efforts for those in your area!
2. Think about how much your language is tied to your own identity. Recipes your grandmother wrote out, songs that your mother sang to you as a child, books you've read that have changed your life. Take pride in your language, and listen to others who take pride in their languages.